293 parser tutorial with exercise (#294)
FAIRmat-NFDI/nomad-docs: docs/tutorial/develop_plugin/create_parser_eln_only.md

# Parsing from an ELN: user-editable entries

In this part you will create a parser using the ELN approach. On the one hand, more manual steps will need to be performed by the user for the file processing; on the other hand, the resulting entry will be user-editable, allowing users to overwrite or modify information provided by the source file.

From the user point of view, the NOMAD entry should be created manually, and some information can be filled in manually as well. Next, the source file can be added, and only the data corresponding to the **empty** fields of the entry (not filled by the user) will be filled from the source file. The manually filled quantities will remain unchanged, even if the data there contradicts the source file. After that, the entry remains editable and manual changes have priority over the source file.

From the developer point of view, this means that the actual parser entry point is not needed. The entry can be created from the schema, and all the necessary steps can be performed within the `normalize()` method of the schema.

## Tutorial instructions

!!! question "Tutorial 2.1"

>     Please switch to the parser tutorial 2 by commenting lines corresponding to `tutorial_1` and uncommenting line corresponding to `tutorial_2` in the `[project.entry-points.'nomad.plugin']` section of the `pyproject.toml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Please switch to the parser tutorial 2 by commenting out lines corresponding to `tutorial_1` and uncommenting the line corresponding to `tutorial_2` in the `[project.entry-points.'nomad.plugin']` section of the `pyproject.toml`.
```

    # parser_tutorial_3_schema = "nomad_plugin_tutorials.parsers.tutorial_3.schema:microscopy"
    # parser_tutorial_3_parser = "nomad_plugin_tutorials.parsers.tutorial_3.parsers:microscopy"
    ```

Note that the parser entry point is not present, and that the schema has already been created. Note also that all of the quantities defined in the `OpticalMicroscopy` schema and its subsections have an additional `a_eln` parameter set to:

```py
ELNAnnotation(component=ELNComponentEnum.<data_type>)
```

This makes the corresponding fields in the GUI user-editable (see more details in the [schema tutorial](create_schema_package.md)).

!!! question "Tutorial 2.2"

    The `normalize()` method of the `OpticalMicroscopy` class is currently only calling the same method of the parent class and then raising `NotImplementedError`. Please update `normalize()` method such that it:

    1. Checks if the `data_file` is present / not empty.

    2. If yes, uses the `data_file` value and the `read_data_file()` (same as in parser tutorial part 1) utility function to read the metadata file into a python dictionary.

>     3. Then, if the dictionary is created successfully, calls a `write_data()` method (see Tutorial 2.3) that will fill the entry archive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Then, if the dictionary is created successfully, calls a `write_data()` method (will be implemented in Tutorial 2.3) that will fill the entry archive.
```

            and isinstance(data_dict['sample'], dict)
            and 'sample_ID' in data_dict['sample']
        ):
            measurement.m_setdefault('samples/0')
            measurement.samples[0].lab_id = data_dict['sample']['sample_ID']
            if 'description' in data_dict['sample']:
                measurement.description = data_dict['sample']['description']

        measurement.m_setdefault('settings')
        if resolution := data_dict.get('resolution'):
            measurement.settings.resolution = [float(x) for x in resolution.split('x')]
        if magnification := data_dict.get('magnification'):
            measurement.settings.magnification = float(magnification[:-1])

        measurement.m_setdefault('results/0')
        if image_file_name := data_dict.get('imageFileName'):
            measurement.results[0].image = os.path.join(
                os.path.dirname(self.data_file), image_file_name
            )
    ```

Now the data in the temporary object can be merged into the entry archive so that the priority is given to the data already in the entry archive. This can be done recursively for all subsections of a given archive.

!!! question "Tutorial 2.4"

>     Use an example that is already present in the `utils.py` file of the plugin as the `merge_sections()` function to complete `write_data()` method of the `OpticalMicroscopy` class.

Reviewer: This is quite unclear to me. Is this what you meant?

```suggestion
    Use the `merge_sections()` function from the `utils` submodules to complete `write_data()` method of the `OpticalMicroscopy` class by merging the temporary object into the `self` object (which contains potential user input).
```

    You can find this class in the `tutorial-mode` branch under `src / nomad_plugin_tutorials / parsers / tutorial_2 / schema / schema_package.py`. Read the instructions in the code for more information.

??? success "Tutorial 2.4: Solution"

    ```py

    class OpticalMicroscopy(Measurement, EntryData):

    ...

    def write_data(self, data_dict: dict, logger: 'BoundLogger') -> None:

        ...

        merge_sections(self, measurement, logger=logger)
    ```

> ## User-editable entries: the outcome

Reviewer: Again, we need to actually run some parsing an normalization to check that it works!
